# Chapter 12 Why Write Comments? The Four Excuses

In-code documentation plays a crucial role in software design. Comments are essential to help developers understand a system and work efficiently, but the role of comments goes beyond this. Documentation also plays an important role in abstraction; without comments, you can’t hide complexity. Finally, the process of writing comments, if done correctly, will actually improve a system’s design. Conversely, a good software design loses much of its value if it is poorly documented.

Unfortunately, this view is not universally shared. A significant fraction of production code contains essentially no comments. Many developers think that comments are a waste of time; others see the value in comments, but somehow never get around to writing them. Fortunately, many development teams recognize the value of documentation, and it feels like the prevalence of these teams is gradually increasing. However, even in teams that encourage documentation, comments are often viewed as drudge work and many developers don’t understand how to write them, so the resulting documentation is often mediocre. Inadequate documentation creates a huge and unnecessary drag on software development.

In this chapter I will discuss the excuses developers use to avoid writing comments, and the reasons why comments really do matter. Chapter 13 will then describe how to write good comments and the next few chapters after that will discuss related issues such as choosing variable names and how to use documentation to improve a system’s design. I hope these chapters will convince you of three things: good comments can make a big difference in the overall quality of software; it isn’t hard to write good comments; and (this may be hard to believe) writing comments can actually be fun.

When developers don’t write comments, they usually justify their behavior with one or more of the following excuses:

- “Good code is self-documenting.”
- “I don’t have time to write comments.”
- “Comments get out of date and become misleading.”
- “The comments I have seen are all worthless; why bother?” In the sections below I will address each of these excuses in turn.

## 12.1 Good code is self-documenting

## 12.2 I don’t have time to write comments

## 12.3 Comments get out of date and become misleading

## 12.4 All the comments I have seen are worthless

## 12.5 Benefits of well-written comments

